feat: Add Terra SRPM and appstream page, remove Terra Policy page and move the contents into contributing, and new guidelines page. Also fix some stuff (#196)
FyraLabs/devdocs: pages/terra/appstream.mdx

---

> title: Appstream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: AppStream
```

> description: "How to use Appstream Metainfo in Terra packages."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "How to use AppStream MetaInfo in Terra packages."
```

Reviewer 2: metainfo is lowercase

Reviewer: it's looking inconsistent

here it's capped like appstream 

https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/metainfocreator/

in other places it's Metainfo or metainfo

we should either go with MetaInfo or treat it like an non–proper noun and cap it in titles

Author: Let's cap it everywhere

---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

> # Appstream Metainfo in Terra packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# AppStream MetaInfo in Terra packages
```

> Terra supports Appstream metainfo, which enables your package to be picked up by graphical software 'store' applications, such as [KDE Plasma's Discover](https://apps.kde.org/discover/) or [GNOME's Software app](https://apps.gnome.org/Software/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terra supports AppStream MetaInfo, which enables your package to be picked up by graphical software 'store' applications, such as [KDE Plasma's Discover](https://apps.kde.org/discover/) or [GNOME's Software app](https://apps.gnome.org/Software/).
In Ultramarine, we encourage the use of these graphical store, so adding AppStream MetaInfo is great for discoverability.
```
mention that we pretty much always tell ultramarine users to check their app store so this is good for discoverability

> This page will cover creating and installing appstream metainfo to your package, but we also highly encourage you to read over the documentation [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page will cover creating and installing AppStream MetaInfo to your package, but we also highly encourage you to read over the documentation [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html).
```

> If you have difficulty populating the `.metainfo.xml` file, please seek support in our [Discord](https://fyralabs.com/discord) server, or make a draft pull request asking for assistance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have difficulty populating the `.metainfo.xml` file, hop into our [Discord](https://fyralabs.com/discord) server, or make a draft pull request asking for assistance.
```

<Callout type="info">
  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
  NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and
  "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
  [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119) and
  [RFC 8174](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174).
</Callout>

> ## When Should I Use Appstream Metainfo?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## When Should I Use AppStream MetaInfo?
```

> Packages satisfying any of the following cases are RECOMMENDED to provide the metainfo file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packages that fit any of the following cases SHOULD provide the metainfo file.
```
words flowing says this should say
"Packages that fit any of the following cases should provide a metainfo file."
but frankly i can't be assed to read the RFC RFC so i leave this an an exercise to the author

- If upstream already provides the metainfo file, you SHOULD `install` it instead of making your own

> - Graphical applications

Reviewer: we should consider requiring it for graphical apps, also per FMOS applications (when graphical) are apps, like how you should be saying devices

```suggestion
- Graphical apps
```

- TUI applications that make sense to be opened in a graphical environment

> Other packages MAY also provide appstream metadata files.

Reviewer: you should note that addons/extensions for other programs or apps should have metainfo as well

## Creating the `metainfo.xml` File

> Before creating your `metainfo.xml` file, check out our [appstream helper macro](./appstream#terra_appstream), as it can save a lot of effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before creating your `metainfo.xml` file, check out our [AppStream helper macro](./appstream#terra_appstream), it can save a lot of effort.
```

Determine your package's app ID, then start with the template below.
The metainfo file MUST be named `[1;3mapp_id[0m.metainfo.xml{:ansi}`.
For example, `com.github.neohtop.metainfo.xml`.

### Determining the App ID

If your package has an app ID used in file names, or references an app ID in any way, you MUST use this as the app ID in your spec.
See [here](#installing-your-metainfo-file) to learn how to define the app ID in your spec file.

> If you do not know what the app ID of the package is, determine it using the [reverse domain name notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_domain_name_notation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not know what the app ID of the package is, determine it using [reverse domain name notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_domain_name_notation).
```

- If your package is only hosted on GitHub (no website, not a GitHub mirror), then the app ID MUST be `com.github.[1;3mAPP-NAME{:ansi}`.

> - If your package has its own website, or the organization that creates it does, you MUST use its website in the app ID. Using Microsoft Edit as an example, the app ID will be `com.microsoft.edit`.

Reviewer: does appstream do this flatpak style? if yes the app's name should be cased properly, i.e com.microsoft.Edit

### metainfo.xml Template

Everything in this template SHOULD be in your metainfo.xml, but there are many optional sections not included that you may want.
We will go over the important ones in the next section.

```xml
<!-- All uppercase words MUST be replaced with the package-specific value. -->
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<component type="TYPE">
  <id>APPID</id>
  <metadata_license>CC0-1.0</metadata_license> <!-- You SHOULD license your metainfo.xml as CC0-1.0 -->
  <project_license>LICENSE</project_license>
  <icon type="local">ICON DIRECTORY</icon> <!-- For now, the icon type MUST be local due to a bug where remote icon files do not work. This should be a .png or .svg application icon that gets installed by your package. -->

  <name>NAME</name>
  <summary>SUMMARY</summary> <!-- SHOULD be the same as the `Summary:` in your .spec file. -->

  <description> <!-- SHOULD be the same as the `%description` in your .spec file. -->
    <p>
        DESCRIPTION.
    </p>
  </description>

  <launchable type="desktop-id">NAME.desktop</launchable>

>   <url type="homepage">URL</url> <!-- Can be the GitHub page if need be. -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <url type="homepage">URL</url> <!-- Can be the GitHub page, prefer a website though-->
```

  <releases>
    <release version="PACKAGE VERISON"/>
  </releases>
</component>
```

### Optional metainfo.xml sections

These metainfo tags are optional, but it is RECOMMENDED to use as many as you can to properly flesh out the metainfo.

> Other tags exist that are not listed, you are free to use them but, but are typically not useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other tags exist that are not listed, you are free to use them, but they're generally not useful.
```
hah @Its-J missed one

> All information based on the freedesktop specification, and each section links to it's freedesktop page for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All information here is based on the freedesktop.org specification, and each section links to its respective freedesktop page for more info.
```
formally "freedesktop.org", we should call it that at least once

also "it's" is a contraction of it is not the possessive it, @Its-J you gotta get your grammar pedantics up!

Again, we highly recommend you read through the entire spec [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Quickstart.html) and [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html).

#### Keywords

The `<keywords/>{:xml}` tag[^2] will make your package easier find when users search these terms:

```xml
<keywords>
  <keyword translate="no">IDE</keyword>
  <keyword>development</keyword>
  <keyword>programming</keyword>
  <keyword xml:lang="de">entwicklung</keyword>
  <keyword xml:lang="de">programmierung</keyword>
</keywords>
```

#### Developer

This tag[^3] is to specify the developer/s of your package. This can be a person or group/organization.

<Callout type="warning">
  You MUST NOT use the `<developer_name/>{:xml}` tag.
</Callout>

#### Screenshots

This tag[^4] can be either a video or a picture, and is used to showcase the package in software stores.
You can (and should) use full URLs to screenshots.

> Freedesktop's example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
freedesktop's example:
```
per FMOS "Proper nouns should always be capitalized unless they are a name stylized lowercase."

    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-1.png</image>
  </screenshot>
  <screenshot>
    <caption>Foobar showing the frobnicate functionality.</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-2.png</image>
  </screenshot>
  <screenshot>
    <video codec="av1" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screencast.mkv</video>
  </screenshot>

  <screenshot environment="plasma-mobile">
    <caption>The FooBar main window, but on Plasma Mobile</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-1_plasma-mobile.png</image>
  </screenshot>

  <screenshot environment="gnome:dark">
    <caption>The FooBar main window, on GNOME in dark mode</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-1_gnome_dark.png</image>
  </screenshot>
 </screenshots>
 ```

### Macros

#### %terra_appstream

`%terra_appstream{:rpmspec}` will add more sections to your `metainfo.xml`, or can generate your metainfo.xml file entirely.
You SHOULD use it when installing your own metainfo.xml file.

> Review the [Terra Appstream Helper's README](https://github.com/terrapkg/appstream-helper/blob/main/README.md) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Review the [Terra AppStream helper README](https://github.com/terrapkg/appstream-helper/blob/main/README.md) for more.
```
pick one, either possessive helper's and no the or vice versa, i suggest the latter, also make casing consistent

You MAY need to add this line to your spec file: `BuildRequires: terra-appstream-helper{:rpmspec}`

`%appid{:rpmspec}` SHOULD be defined at the top of your spec file (preamble), and used in references to the metainfo file name, for example:

```rpmspec
%{_metainfodir}/%appid.metainfo.xml
```

Other components may be defined, such as `name_pretty`, `developer`, `org`, etc.

> ### Installing your Metainfo File

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installing your MetaInfo File
```

Reviewer 2: please see official case

> To properly install your metainfo file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To properly install your MetaInfo file:
```

If there are more then one binary, list them all.
You can also use this for libraries. More information on the `<provides/>{:xml}` tag can be found in the documentation [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html#tag-provides).

Basic `<provides/>{:xml}` tag example:
```xml
<provides>
  <binary>BINARY NAME</binary>
</provides>
```

#### Keywords

The `<keywords/>{:xml}` tag will make your package easier find when users search these terms.
More information can be found [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html#tag-keywords).

Freedesktop's example:

```xml
<keywords>
  <keyword translate="no">IDE</keyword>
  <keyword>development</keyword>
  <keyword>programming</keyword>
  <keyword xml:lang="de">entwicklung</keyword>
  <keyword xml:lang="de">programmierung</keyword>
</keywords>
```

#### Developer

This tag is to specify the developer/s of your package. This can be a person or group/organization.
Information on this tag can be found [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html#tag-developer).

> NOTE - You MUST NOT use the `<developer_name/>{:xml}` tag.

Reviewer 3: Change to **"NOTE:"** for consistency?
```suggestion
**NOTE:** You MUST NOT use the `<developer_name/>{:xml}` tag.
```

Freedesktop's example:

```xml
<screenshots>
  <screenshot type="default">
    <caption>The FooBar main window.</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-1.png</image>
  </screenshot>
  <screenshot>
    <caption>Foobar showing the frobnicate functionality.</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-2.png</image>
  </screenshot>
  <screenshot>
    <video codec="av1" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screencast.mkv</video>
  </screenshot>

  <screenshot environment="plasma-mobile">
    <caption>The FooBar main window, but on Plasma Mobile</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-1_plasma-mobile.png</image>
  </screenshot>

  <screenshot environment="gnome:dark">
    <caption>The FooBar main window, on GNOME in dark mode</caption>
    <image type="source" width="1600" height="900">https://example.com/foobar/screenshot-1_gnome_dark.png</image>
  </screenshot>
 </screenshots>
 ```

### Macros

#### %terra_appstream

> In short, `%terra_appstream{:rpmspec` assists with installing your metainfo.xml file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In short, `%terra_appstream{:rpmspec}` assists with installing your metainfo.xml file.
```

Author: LOL

> In short, `%terra_appstream{:rpmspec}` assists with installing your metainfo.xml file.

Reviewer 5: Unclear what this macro does

  [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119) and
  [RFC 8174](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174).
</Callout>

## When Should I Use Appstream Metainfo?

Packages satisfying any of the following cases are RECOMMENDED to provide the metainfo file.

- If upstream already provides the metainfo file, you SHOULD `install` it instead of making your own
- Graphical applications
- TUI applications that make sense to be opened in a graphical environment

Other packages MAY also provide appstream metadata files.

## Creating the `metainfo.xml` File

Determine your package's app ID, then start with the template below.
The metainfo file MUST be named `[1;3mapp_id[0m.metainfo.xml{:ansi}`.
For example, `com.github.neohtop.metainfo.xml`.

### Determining the App ID

If your package has an app ID used in file names, or references an app ID in any way, you MUST use this as the app ID in your spec.
See [here](#installing-your-metainfo-file) to learn how to define the app ID in your spec file.

If you do not know what the app ID of the package is, determine it using the [reverse domain name notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_domain_name_notation).

> - If your package is only hosted on GitHub (no website, not a GitHub mirror), then the app ID MUST be `com.github.[1;3mAPP-NAME{:ansi}`.

Reviewer 6: ANSI escape codes????

Author: Ah it's for this:
<img width="195" height="33" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e40d5dd0-3b43-4ab4-af2d-923bdd7b8899" />

  <name>NAME</name>
  <summary>SUMMARY</summary> <!-- SHOULD be the same as the `Summary:` in your .spec file. -->

  <description> <!-- SHOULD be the same as the `%description` in your .spec file. -->
    <p>
        DESCRIPTION.
    </p>
  </description>

  <launchable type="desktop-id">NAME.desktop</launchable>

  <url type="homepage">URL</url> <!-- Can be the GitHub page if need be. -->

  <releases>
    <release version="PACKAGE VERISON"/>
  </releases>
</component>
```

### Optional metainfo.xml sections

These metainfo tags are optional, but it is RECOMMENDED to use as many as you can to properly flesh out the metainfo.
Other tags exist that are not listed, you are free to use them but, but are typically not useful.

All information based on the freedesktop specification, and each section links to it's freedesktop page for more info.
Again, we highly recommend you read through the entire spec [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Quickstart.html) and [here](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/appstream/docs/chap-Metadata.html).

#### Provides

> All binary names in the default PATH (typically `/usr/bin`) SHOULD be listed here.

Reviewer 6: binaries should be automatically generated by the macro
